I think there are a few things at play here.

On one hand there seems to be a level of abstraction or removal from practice that is important in order to properly reflect on the process. Designing, the reflecting through design, the reflecting on design, the reflecting on design practice all feel at different removes both emotionally and intellectually. Frank Chimero discusses this idea in *The Shape of Design* when talking about how painters have two stances, 1) actively painting and 2) stepping back to assess what you have applied to the canvas [[7]]. I think it's probably worthwhile to reread it in the next few weeks through this lens.

Also, in actual practice, the commit messages are written immediately as I am uploading the current state of the project to GitHub. I try not to dwell too much on any insights, formal considerations, or pomp, but instead just note down what has happened since the last time I committed, along with some thoughts about where I might want to go next. In contrast, process journals like this one are written after there has been some distance. I think there is a natural reflection that happens at this point as I go about the rest of my day/week. I think about what I have done so far, what I liked, what I didn’t like, and have spent some time interacting with the program apart from the act of creation. By the time I sit down to write up the journal entry, then, I have a better understanding of the work.

Additionally, my default mindset while writing the process journals is that they are going to be looked at by the general public (or at least have a higher probability than my commit messages). Some of this comes from a background in traditional interaction design, where you are taught to heavily document your process, and some of it comes from the form: it’s just easier to look at a readme file than it is to look through the commit messages. And really this is only because GitHub has designed it this way. Something like Enric’s tool could totally flip that paradigm and make the commit messages more readable, which in turn, might change the way that I write those messages!

Lastly, and perhaps most boringly, I write my commit messages within Rider (which is quicker and thus, more top of the head) and my Process entries in Obsidian (which is more streamlined, visually clean, and feels less "programmy"). I think the underlying nature of these two writing environments leads to thinking about the material (and the writing itself) differently. In particular, the blank-slate wysiwyg aspects of Obsidian helps to strip away the markup-centered focus of traditional markdown and focus on the words and thoughts that I want to convey. 
